IMPROVING THE PROTECTION OF EHV TEED FEEDERS USING LOCAL AGENTS
D V Coury1

J S Thorp2

K M Hopkinson2

K P Birman2

1

University of São Paulo, Brazil
Cornell University, USA

2

INTRODUCTION
The protection of multi-terminal lines is not as simple as
that of two-terminal lines. They usually experience
additional problems caused by the intermediate infeed
from the third terminal, an outfeed, different line lengths
to the tee point, etc. The limitations of non-pilot distance
relays for their protection have been acknowledged for
decades. These limitations lead to the traditional
distance relaying approach to experience severe
underreach and overreach problems. The relay first zone
reach may not even extend beyond the tee point in some
underreach cases (1),(2).
An approach based on adaptive relaying to face such a
situation and some fundamental concepts concerning it
was presented by Rockefeller (3). Horowitz et al (4)
define adaptive relaying as a protection philosophy
which permits and seeks to make adjustments to various
protection functions in order to make them more attuned
to prevailing power system conditions. An adaptive
setting concept for two and three terminal lines, which
can respond to changes in the network conditions, was
proposed by Xia et al (5), (6). Stedall et al (7) also
proposed an investigation into the use of adaptive
setting techniques for improved distance back-up
protection.
This paper discusses the adaptation of the settings of
distance relays for multi-terminal lines employing
agents. Agents are software processes capable of
searching for information in networks, interacting with
pieces of equipment and performing tasks on behalf of
their owners (relays). Moreover, they are autonomous
and cooperative. Very few publications concerning the
application of agents in the protection field have been
reported in the literature. Tomita et al (8) proposed a
cooperative protection system utilizing agents. Relay
agents were constructed, and the cooperation of the
main agents was simulated for primary, backup and
adaptive protection.
Results illustrating the improved performance of the
adaptive method proposed compared to conventional
fixed settings are presented in the following sections.
AGENT TECHNOLOGY
A software agent is a computer program that takes
independent action based on events in the surrounding
environment (Genesereth (9)). Under the control of
some application that owns the agent, it is sent forth or
placed at some site within a network where it takes local
actions on behalf of its owners. Agents are dynamic
entities. For example, an agent can exhibit dynamically

changing behavior, receiving updated parameter settings
from the owner or from other agents participating in the
same application. An agent can also learn from the
environment; the term “intelligent” is sometimes applied
to such agents, particularly if the learning method
involves artificial intelligence tools, or neural networks.
Agents can be further subdivided based on their
mobility. Mobile agents can literally travel from one
location to another while maintaining their state and
functionality. One imagines such an agent as moving
through a network in search of certain data, or for
locations having certain attributes. In contrast, local
agents are placed by the owner and then remain in the
same location throughout their computational lives.
Both kinds of agents normally have the ability to
communicate with one another making mobility a lesser
benefit than it might appear at first glance.
In the present paper, we consider the simplest kinds of
agents: local, non-intelligent ones. Our work seeks to
demonstrate advantages stemming from the rapid
response time made possible by placing a computational
task close to the point where an action or measurement
is needed, and the simplicity of the power systems
architecture afforded by the ability to send code to
general purpose computing platforms. The basic idea is
that by doing so, new control paradigms can be
introduced and executed efficiently, without changing
the basic computing architecture of the power systems
network.
The use of agents raises security considerations that go
beyond those encountered in traditional software
systems. Among the issues that need to be considered
are the mechanism for installing agents and for
communicating parameter updates to them, the means by
which a computing platform or agent authenticates
incoming messages, and the enforcement of agent
resource restrictions, such as the use of scarce
computational cycles or space in databases and file
systems. Prior to deploying agents in mission-critical
settings, one would need satisfying answers on all of
these fronts. Preliminary work towards policies
addressing these issues can be found in (10).
THE PROPOSED COMMUNICATION
STRUCTURE AND THE POWER SYSTEM
STUDIED
The communication structure (middleware)
The computing infrastructure in which our agent
community will operate is a subject of active speculation
at the time of this writing. The existing power grid

communication infrastructure is composed of a
hodgepodge of equipment ranging from high-end fiber
optic cables with large data bandwidth to crude systems
with limited data transfer capabilities to nothing at all.
Few utility communications lines are interconnected.
However, this picture will change as utilities deploy ever
more elaborate control mechanisms, demanding
increasingly rich communication frameworks, steps that
can easily be foreseen as part of the battle to improve
operating efficiencies.
The relay scheme proposed here has modest network
resource requirements compared to what we believe will
be available in the near future. It is expected that the
need for greater communication will result in a Utility
Intranet (UI) that would interconnect control areas and
their dependent entities using a relatively high capacity
network similar to the Internet but physically separate
from it and dedicated to the power systems application.
However, we caution that predictions of network
bandwidth requirements and total network capacity can
be deceptively reassuring. History has shown a tendency
for networked applications to use all bandwidth made
available to them.
To evaluate the feasibility of employing agents and
network communication in power-systems relay
protection, we need to understand the reliability and
latency requirements of the relays. By doing so, we can
determine whether or not a proposed combination of
network hardware and communication protocols can
meet the protection system's needs. Relays play a critical
role in power grid operations with low tolerance for
failures. One can identify that situations in
communication between agents used for relay control
might need to take place in as little as 10 ms, a latency
realm leaving little time to recover from data
transmission failures. It is therefore critical to ask
whether available technology can meet those
requirements.
In order to face some of the network limitations,
communication protocols like Cornell's Spinglass have
been developed by Birman et al (11). Spinglass allows
the user to achieve high levels of reliability using
protocols that probabilistically mask latency fluctuations
and message loss. Spinglass could be optimized for use
in power relaying and might form a powerful
infrastructure for improved protection schemes.

Terminal
1

30km

100 km

100km

~

~

TTerminal
2

1.0 /_0o

0.9 /_-8o

400 kV

80km

~

Terminal
3
1.0 /_ -5o

Figure 1 The three-ended system utilized for tests

A 400 kV system with tee configuration is shown in Fig.
1. The different line lengths are presented in the figure,
as well as the voltage levels at the busbars. This work
focuses on line-to-ground faults, since most faults in
power system transmission lines are of this type.
The protection system associated with this configuration
was simulated for conventional non-pilot protection as
well as a portion of the agent based relaying approach
proposed. Digital distance relays with three zone
quadrilateral characteristics located at terminals 1, 2 and
3 were simulated. DFT (Discrete Fourier Transform)
routines were utilized in order to filter the faulted waves.
Circuit breakers were associated with the relays in order
to isolate the line in case of an internal fault.
AGENT RELAYS
Fig.2 presents the agent mechanism for protection
purposes. It can be initially divided into an adaptive prefault approach and a post-fault transfer trip action. The
mechanism utilizes local agents at terminals 1, 2 and 3
communicating with each other.
Adaptive Pre-fault Approach
The main purpose of the proposed agent mechanism is
to carry out the adaptation of the settings of distance
relays for multi-terminal lines in order to ensure correct
performance over a wide variety of operation
conditions.
Initially, local agents for terminals 1, 2 and 3 can be
defined as:

The three-ended system utilized
In order to simulate the real system encountered in
practice, this work makes use of a digital simulator of
faulted transmission lines known as PSCAD/EMTDC
(Electromagnetic Transients and Controls Simulation
Engine) (12).
It should be mentioned that although
the technique described is based on Computer Aided
Design (CAD), practical considerations such as the
Capacitor Voltage Transformer (CVT), Current
Transformer (CT) and anti-aliasing filters on system
fault data were also included in the simulation.

Operation Agent: This is a local agent, which monitors
the operating condition at a terminal. The following
parameters related to the system condition must be
obtained from on-line measurements and/or calculations:
• Pre-fault busbar voltages
• Power transfer angles
• Source impedances
Breaker Status Agent: This local agent monitors changes
in the system topology based on circuit breaker status.

The two local agents, shown in Fig.2, must
communicate with the Coordination Agent, as defined in
item 3.
Coordination Agent: The coordination agent collects
information, makes decision, and disseminates
information to the other two Coordination agents. The
Coordination Agent at each terminal can then choose the
correct relay characteristic, based on the information
received.
We propose that a group of settings be calculated offline, and that these parameters be renewed from time to
time as the system condition changes beyond a certain
limit, based on the Coordination Agent information.
Then, when a fault occurs the relay will operate close to
its ideal characteristic.
First Zone Transfer Trip
This action takes place after the fault occurrence. In
order to decrease the clearance time, when a fault is
detected in the first zone of any of the relays located at
the three terminals, a trip signal is sent through the
communication network to the other two ends. A First
Zone Local Agent coordinates the first zone transfer
trip.
First
Zone
Agent

COORDINATION

AGENT

Breaker
Status

Operation

Agent

Agent
data

request

-INTERFACE WITH THE POWER SYSTEMConnection to the other two terminals

Figure 2 Agent mechanism in one terminal for protection
purpose

RESULTS OBTAINED UTILIZING AGENT
TECHNOLOGY
Adaptive Pre-fault Approach Results
Distance relaying techniques have attracted considerable
attention for the protection of transmission lines. The
principle of this technique measures the impedance at a
fundamental frequency between the relay location and
the fault point, thus determining if a fault is internal or

external to a protection zone. The relationship between
voltage and current is used for this purpose. This
relationship is disturbed when there is infeed or outfeed.
As mentioned earlier, this can make the relay experience
severe underreach or overreach problems, especially
considering non-pilot protection schemes for three
terminal lines. Another situation that has to be taken into
account is when the tap is not working for some reason.
The setting of distance relays must reflect all the
situations described earlier. Fig. 3(a) shows the typical
non-pilot distance protection with the first zone for a
three terminal line at the condition represented in Fig. 1.
As shown in the figure, only approximately 20 from 210
km obtained instantaneous trip from the three ends of
the lines in the case of an internal fault. Fig. 3(b)
illustrates the improvement that can be found with the
adaptive scheme utilizing Agents that is proposed in this
work. The instantaneous trip area increased to
approximately 67 km (more than three times the nonpilot condition) for the same situation. As mentioned
before, the proposed adaptive scheme can alter settings
to ensure better performance over a wide variety of
operation conditions.
Clearance Time
In order to highlight the efficiency of the proposed
scheme, this section presents a figure comparing the
clearance time for the conventional non-pilot protection
as well as for the proposed scheme utilizing Agents.
Fig. 4 presents the clearance time for the three-ended
line shown in Fig. 1. Line-to-ground faults are applied to
different locations on leg 1-T, considering different fault
inception angles and fault resistance of 10 ohms. The
figure shows the average clearance time considering legs
1, 2 and 3 for the non-pilot protection as well as the
proposed scheme considering three different traffic
conditions. A considerable decrease in clearance time
considering the proposed scheme can be observed.
It should be noted that an opening time of approximately
three cycles for the circuit breaker utilized was
considered. It isolates the fault by interrupting the
current at or near a current zero. A coordination delay
for zone two of the order of 0.3 s was also utilized.
CONCLUSION
An application of agents acting within a
communication structure to adaptive relay settings for
multi-terminal lines was presented in this paper. Results
illustrating the performance of the new method proposed
compared to conventional fixed settings were shown.
The new approach based on agents was divided in an
adaptive pre-fault approach and a post-fault transfer trip
action. In order to test the proposed scheme, a digital
simulation of a faulted transmission line was performed
utilizing the PSCAD/EMTDC software. The protection
system associated with this configuration was also
simulated both for conventional non-pilot protection as
well as for the Agent based relaying.

Terminal 2

Terminal 1

very attractive alternative to improve the performance of
protection systems.

T

~

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the research support by
subcontract No. 35352-6085 with Cornell University
under WO 8333-04 from the Electric Power Institute
and the U.S. Army Research Office. Our
acknowledgments also extend to DARPA/RADC grant
F30602-99-1-6532 as well as FAPESP (Fundação de
Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo -Brazil).

20km

Terminal 3

~

REFERENCES
(a) Non-pilot protection
Terminal 1

Terminal 2

T

~

67 km

Terminal 3

~
(b)Agent Technology proposed – Adaptive pre-fault scheme
Figure 3 Distance relaying of a three ended transmission line

(msec)

Average clearance time on the three legs
0,4

nonpilot

0,3

traffic1

0,2

traffic2

0,1

traffic3

0
1

2

3

TL leg

Figure 4 Average clearance time for the three legs considering
non-pilot protection and the scheme proposed

The results showed that the new approach would alter
adaptive settings to ensure correct performance over a
wide variety of operation conditions, which is an
improvement compared to fixed settings for the relays.
Moreover, a considerable decrease in clearance time
compared to conventional non-pilot protection was
observed.
It should then be emphasized that the new approach is
not only a solution for a well-known problem, but also a

(1) Horowitz S H and Phadke AG, 1996 “Power System
Relaying”, John Wiley and Sons.
(2) IEEE Working Group, 1979, “Protection Aspects of
Multi-terminal Lines”, IEEE Special Publication, 79
TH0056-2-PWR.
(3) Rockefeller G D, Wagner C L, Linders J R, Hicks K
L and Rizy D T, 1988 “Adaptive Transmission Relaying
Concepts for Improved Performance”, IEEE Trans. on
Power Delivery, 3 (4), 1446-58.
(4) Horowitz S H, Phadke A G and Thorp J S, 1988
“Adaptive Transmission System Relaying”, IEEE Trans.
on Power Delivery, 3 (4), 1436-45.
(5) Xia Y Q , Li K K and David A K , 1994 “Adaptive
Relay Setting for Stand Alone Digital Distance
Protection”, IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, 9(1), 48091.
(6) Xia Y Q, David A K and Li K K, 1994 “HighResistance Faults on a Multi-Terminal Line: Analysis,
Simulated Studies and an Adaptive Distance Relaying
Scheme”, IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, 9 (1), 492500.
(7) Stedall B, Moore P, Johns A, Goody J and Burt M,
1996 “An Investigation into the use of Adaptive Setting
Techniques for Improved Distance Back-up Protection”,
IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, 11 (2), 757- 62.
(8) Tomita Y, Fukui C, Kudo H, Koda J, Yabe K, 1998
“A Cooperative Protection System with an Agent
Model”, IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, 13 (4), 106066.
(9) Genesereth M and Ketchpel S, 1994 "Software
Agents", Communications of the ACM, 37(7), 48-52,
147.
(10) Schneider F, 1997 "Towards Fault-tolerant and
Secure Agentry", 111th International Workshop on
Distributed Algorithms, 1320, September 1-14.
(11) Birman K, Hayden M, Ozkasap O, Xiao Z, Budiu
M and Minsky Y, 1999 "Bimodal Multicast", ACM
Trans. on Computer Systems, 17(2).
(12) PSCAD/EMTDC Manual, 1998 Getting Started,
Manitoba HVDC Center

